OFFGAS AI FUTURE DEVELOPMENT - SPEECH

For future developments, we created a small separate proof of concept to show that the data collected by OffGas can also be used for a first Machine Learning implementation.

This part does not modify the real system. Arduino, Bridge, MQTT, Node-RED and the Dashboard continue to work exactly as in the main version of the project. The AI demo is external and only shows a possible future evolution of the system.

The idea starts from gas_data.csv, which is the file generated by the Bridge and contains the historical gas values measured by the real prototype G1. On this data, we use a RandomForestRegressor, so a regression model, because the goal is not to directly classify the state as safe, warning or critical, but to predict a numerical value: the expected gas value about 30 seconds in the future.

The training phase works as follows.

First, we read the CSV and sort the data by timestamp, because we are working with a time series and the order of the samples is important. Then we filter only the data from G1, because G1 is the real prototype connected to the MQ-2 sensor.

After that, we transform the time series into a supervised learning problem. For each row of the dataset, we build an input composed of recent gas values:

- gas_now
- gas_1_step_ago
- gas_2_steps_ago
- gas_3_steps_ago
- mean_last_4_values

So the model does not receive only the current gas value, but also the three previous values and the average of the last four samples. This gives the model a simple context about the recent gas trend.

The target, which is the value the model has to learn to predict, is created by taking the gas value six samples ahead.

In the code, this is done with:

df["target_gas_in_30s"] = df["gas"].shift(-PREDICTION_STEPS)

In our case:

PREDICTION_STEPS = 6

This is because Arduino sends one gas reading approximately every 5 seconds.

So:

6 samples x 5 seconds = about 30 seconds

In practice, each training example becomes:

Input:
recent gas values

Expected output:
gas value observed about 30 seconds later

Then we split the dataset into a training set and a test set. The training set is used to let the model learn the relationship between recent gas values and future gas values. The test set is used to evaluate whether the model can also make predictions on data that it did not directly see during training.

During training, the RandomForestRegressor learns a relationship between the recent gas behavior and the future gas value. At the end, the trained model is saved in gas_rf_model.pkl, so it can be reused by the prediction script without repeating the whole training phase every time.

The predict_demo.py script represents the usage phase of the model. When we run it, it loads the trained model, reads the updated CSV, takes the last four available G1 gas values and rebuilds the same features used during training.

For example, if the last four values are:

160, 162, 163, 164

the script builds:

gas_now = 164
gas_1_step_ago = 163
gas_2_steps_ago = 162
gas_3_steps_ago = 160
mean_last_4_values = 162.25

These values are passed to the model, which returns a numerical prediction: the expected gas value about 30 seconds in the future.

The demo output shows:

- the last 4 values used
- the current gas value
- the predicted gas value in 30 seconds
- the demo threshold configured in the code
- whether the prediction exceeds the threshold or not

The threshold inside predict_demo.py is a fixed variable chosen manually only for the offline demo. In the real project, this threshold would not be fixed in the code; it would be dynamically calculated by Node-RED, as already happens in the main system logic. Here it is used only to show the concept of predicted crossing: checking whether the value predicted by the model could exceed a safety threshold.

During training, we also calculate an evaluation error, such as the Mean Absolute Error or eventually the Mean Squared Error. This value is useful to measure how far the model predictions are from the real values in the test set. In practice, we compare the value predicted by the model with the value that was actually observed 30 seconds later. If the error is low, the model is following the data trend well; if the error is high, the prediction is less reliable and we would need more data, better features, or a more suitable model.

This demo is not intended to be a final or production-ready AI model. The current dataset is limited and mostly contains stable values, so the result should be interpreted as a feasibility demonstration. The main point is to show that OffGas already produces useful historical data, and that this data can be transformed into a supervised dataset to develop a more advanced AI-based prediction system in the future.

In summary, the real project remains stable and unchanged, while this demo shows how, in the future, a Machine Learning predictive module could be added alongside the current logic to estimate the gas value in advance and support smarter preventive decisions.